<START>
Commentary on “ Massachusetts marijuana excise tax revenue exceeds alcohol for first time ”

Microeconomics is the study of how individuals and societies use scarce resources to fulfill unlimited wants and needs. One way that governments can adjust the usage of the resources is through intervention which is when the government takes action in the economy in order to resolve market failures. An example of this is indirect taxes, which decreases the supply in a market. The state of Massachusetts is using a series of indirect taxes in order to adjust for the overconsumption in the market for marijuana, as well as to generate government revenue.
Marijuana has multiple negative externalities of consumption. First, the health concerns can prevent people from contributing to the economy, and if they need medical attention, could prevent others from receiving needed care. These problems are extended to people who breathe in secondhand smoke. Additionally, consuming marijuana has an impairing effect on the user, which can cause them to make decisions that would put themselves or others at risk. For example, if someone were to smoke cannabis and proceed to drive a car, they would be putting everyone on the road in danger. A crash would also cause multiple inefficiencies, just like first and secondhand smoke.

Figure #1 shows the market for marijuana before any of the taxes, with the welfare loss caused by the externality shaded. The negative effects of marijuana consumption are shown in the gap between MPB and MSB. Since marijuana is over-consumed and the private benefit is larger than the social benefit, MPB is to the right of MSB.

Figure #2 shows the market for marijuana with the three different ad valorem taxes. S1, S2, and S3 represent the supply curve after a 10.75% excise tax, 6.25% sales tax, and 3% local tax, respectively. The entire shaded area represents the total welfare loss, with the areas labeled “c” resulting from the tax, and the rest resulting from the remaining externality. All of the areas labeled with a “b” represent the revenue generated by the government. This was $74.2 million so far in the fiscal year as of December 2021. Additionally, both benefit curves are very steep, which shows the price inelasticity of demand for marijuana due to its addictive nature. The area on the graph labeled “a” is the welfare loss that was eliminated due to the tax. The entire shaded area above the MSC curve is new welfare loss created either directly or indirectly by the tax. As drawn in Figure #2, the tax created more welfare loss than it removed, since the new welfare loss area is bigger than the area of “a”. Also, due to the price inelasticity of demand, the tax caused the equilibrium price to move much further from the socially optimal price, while the quantity only took a small step towards the socially optimal quantity.

The effectiveness of the tax must be based on the purpose of the tax. If the purpose of the tax was to decrease welfare loss, it was unsuccessful, since it created more welfare loss than it created. Also, the equilibrium point did not move any closer to the socially optimal point, so allocative efficiency is not achieved. If the goal of the tax was allocative efficiency, then a better option would be to subsidize programs that help people addicted to marijuana and other drugs. This would make the demand for marijuana more price elastic, which would make taxes or any other methods more effective in approaching allocative efficiency. However, the article says that “shifting attitudes about cannabis use are helping drive growth”. This means that society in general is becoming less concerned about the effects, and that they could become less relevant if solutions are found. “The transition from medical to recreational use typically leads to a doubling or even tripling of revenues ‘almost overnight,’ according to Vivien Azer, a senior Wall Street research analyst…”. Since the transition leads to large growths in revenue, it is clear that the primary purpose of the tax was to collect government revenue. The $208 million total collected last year in marijuana taxes is possible due to the price inelasticity of demand of marijuana, since even a large tax will not decrease the quantity much. It is also proof that the tax was successful in generating government revenue, which can then be put back into other markets in order to better fulfill the unlimited wants and needs of our society.
<END>
<START>
Commentary on “ China cuts rates as lockdowns and a real estate crisis take their toll ”

Macroeconomics is a branch of economics that studies the behavior and performance of an economy as a whole in the aggregate. One of the primary goals of any government is to create a society with high economic well-being through the use of macroeconomic policies that adjust the entire economy. These policies affect economic growth, unemployment, and inflation, all of which affect the quality of life in the country. In China, COVID-19 mandates and droughts have affected economic growth, which impacts people’s ability to meet their basic needs and their level of financial stability. As a response, China has decreased interest rates in an attempt to increase the economic well-being of its citizens.

The droughts in the south have caused a supply shock in the agricultural industry. Short run aggregate supply decreased causing cost-pull inflation and a recessionary gap. Simultaneously, COVID-19 restrictions led to a decrease in aggregate demand when consumer and investment spending fell. Economic growth slowed in retail and industrial production sectors, and prices fell in the real estate market. The government reacted to the disinflation and deflation present throughout the economy by lowering interest rates by 0.1%.

Figure #1 shows the result of decreasing interest rates during a recessionary gap. The lower interest rates increase both consumer and investment spending, which increases aggregate demand from AD to AD1. This results in price levels increasing from PL1 to PL2, and output increasing from YE to YP. 

Figure #2 shows the result of deregulation by removing or reducing COVID-19 restrictions and shutdowns. Since consumer and investment spending would both increase as firms reopen, AD moves to AD1, increasing price levels from PL1 to PL2, and output from YP to YE. The overall potential of the economy would increase since firms would be more willing and able to offer their goods even with variable costs of production. This results in long-run aggregate supply increases from LRAS to LRAS1, which increases the full employment level of the economy from YP to YP1.

The Chinese government attempted to solve the problem of a slowing economy using monetary policy, specifically a decrease in interest rates. Lower interest rates incentivize people to spend more money because the price of borrowing money is lower, and assets will appreciate slower than when there are high interest rates. This is especially relevant in markets where people tend to take out loans before a purchase. An example of this is the real estate market, which has been experiencing shrinkage in China for some time. In theory, a decrease in interest rates would be successful in correcting the real estate market. Additionally, as shown in Figure #1, it would create growth and remove or reduce the recessionary gap present in the economy as a whole. However, there are also two major downsides to this solution. Rate changes can cause uncertainty in the economy, especially since “the central bank had previously appeared reluctant to lower rates further”. A lower consumer confidence would affect consumer spending, which would impact the overall success of the policy by offsetting some of the growth caused by the lower rates. It could also make citizens unsure of the long term stability of the economy and decrease their economic well-being. The second issue is that it would cause short-term economic growth that is unsustainable over a longer period of time, since the overall capacity of the economy is not expanded. A more ideal long term solution would create sustainable growth by implementing a policy that increases long-run aggregate supply.

“These are drags that can’t be easily solved by monetary policy” according to a journalist from Capital Economy. An option that would create long-term growth by addressing the root of the problem is to use supply side policies. To address the issue in the real estate market, the government could use a market-based policy of deregulation by reducing COVID-19 restrictions and lockdowns. As shown in Figure #2, this would expand the full employment level of the economy since firms are more willing and able to conduct business, which leads to opportunities for more sustainable growth. To fix the problems in the produce market caused by droughts, the government could implement an interventionist policy of spending on irrigation systems. Irrigation is a factor of production for produce, and this policy would increase both its quality and quantity. As with the deregulation, long-run aggregate supply would increase as a result, creating healthy long-term economic growth. Both of these policies would also positively affect the economic well-being of Chinese citizens by making them more able to provide for their basic needs and greatly improving their financial stability. Deregulation would be more effective, however it would also come with the risk of a COVID-19 relapse.
<END>
<START>
Commentary on “ New Zealand dairy and meat farmers disappointed in EU trade deal ”

Global Economics is the study of the interactions between nations through trade and other means in order to achieve their own goals. Since each country has access to different resources, their interdependence increases global allocative efficiency. Free trade agreements (FTA) are pacts between countries that set rules for international trade by using tariffs, quotas, and other control measures. A new FTA was made between New Zealand and the European Union (EU) to adjust the terms of trade between New Zealand and European countries. The deal included the lowering of tariffs on exports from the EU such as clothing and cars, and an increase in the quota for New Zealand agricultural exports including beef, butter, and cheese. The reduction of trade barriers leads to greater volumes of trade and an increase in the interdependence of the two economies.

Figure #1 shows the effect on the New Zealand clothing market of lowering the tariff on imports from the EU from ST1 to ST2. With the original tariff setting the price point for the global market for clothing at PT1, domestic producers were willing and able to sell clothing at Q1, and the difference between domestic quantity demanded and domestic quantity supplied was imported to fulfill the shortage created by lower prices due to international trade. This resulted in imports equalling Q2 - Q1. With the lowered tariff and a price point of PT2, domestic producers were willing and able to sell clothing at Q3, while international producers were willing and able to sell at Q4. This led to an increase in New Zealand’s clothing imports to Q4 - Q3.

Figure #2 shows the effect on the EU beef market on increasing the quota on New Zealand imports from Sq1 to Sq2. With the original quota, imports were limited to Q2 - Q1, and consumers bought a total of Q2 beef from both domestic and international suppliers at a price point of P1. In the FTA, the EU agreed to “increase by 10,000 tonnes its quota of New Zealand beef”, and imports of beef increased by 10,000 tonnes to Q4 - Q3. EU consumers now purchase a quantity Q4 of beef at a lower price of P2.

In theory, the FTA will be successful in providing both sides involved with equal benefits. The lowered tariffs lead to higher imports in New Zealand and higher exports in the EU, while the increased quotas lead to higher imports in the EU and higher exports in New Zealand. Assuming all changes in imports and exports are similar, neither country’s GDP will be majorly affected, so the agreement will not cause inflation or deflation in either economy. This is also true of the foreign exchange market, where the effects of the tariffs and quotas should offset each other, meaning that the FTA will not lead to severe fluctuations in exchange rate between the Euro and New Zealand Dollar. Consumers in both the EU and New Zealand will benefit from lower prices and increased quality associated with foreign trade. New Zealand beef producers will benefit from a larger consumer market because demand for their goods will increase, and the same for EU clothing producers. The increased interdependence caused by the FTA will increase global allocative efficiency, since countries will be more able to specialize in the goods that they have the ability to produce most efficiently. For example, New Zealand has an absolute advantage in beef and other agricultural products since they are able to produce them more efficiently than other countries due to the resources available within the country. Interdependence through international trade benefits European countries that do not have access to the same resources to produce beef, which is “a sensitive area for France in particular”.

New Zealand firms, however, disagree with their government and say that the FTA was not strong enough in providing access to the global market. The director of trade at a New Zealand dairy firm said that “new commercial opportunities from the FTA for dairy products remained constrained”. Removing more of the high levels of global trade protectionism on dairy would satisfy New Zealand dairy producers, but it would also lead to negative effects on producers in countries without an absolute advantage in dairy. Many times, countries are more interested in the benefits of their own firms and consumers than in global efficiency, so New Zealand would have to create an offer in return which would harm their domestic producers in sectors other than agriculture where they do not have an advantage over other countries. Interdependence of countries caused by globalization has many benefits for consumers and powerful producers, but trade protectionism cannot be fully removed because of the smaller domestic firms it serves to protect.
<END>
<START>
Commentary on " United States Car Market "

The United States economy is an extremely complicated mechanism that affects the lives of billions of people. With so many factors involved, it is nearly impossible to pin down a single cause for any disruption in the economy. In order to determine the causes, it is often necessary to first analyze the effects, then work backwards. From 2020-2022, the US car market saw many fluctuations in both price and quantity of vehicles sold. The rising prices outpaced inflation for most of the three years, and sales decreased in 2020 and 2022, with only a slight recovery in 2021. Figure #1 shows the United States annual inflation rate from 2020-2022.

As shown in the graph, inflation first rose above normal levels in April of 2021 and remained high for the rest of the time period considered. It reached its peak in June of 2022 at 9.1%. Similarly to the car market, major causes for these high levels of inflation include the demand shock from pandemic shut-downs and the lowered interest rates set by the Federal Reserve.
The inflation rate represents the change in Consumer Price Index (CPI), which is a measure of the price of goods and services purchased by an average household of four. In the car market specifically, average prices rose by 12.6% between February of 2020 and June of 2021, and rose by another 12.7% between June of 2021 and June of 2022 (Kelley Blue Book, 2020/2022). The average increase in car price was greater than the maximum inflation rate, showing that car prices swelled faster than the rest of the economy. The difference implies another factor affecting the prices outside of simply general inflation.

Quantity of vehicles sold, the other major indicator of the condition of a market, also experienced fluctuations. The monthly number of sales from 2020-2022 is plotted in Figure #2. There was a sharp decrease in sales in March of 2020, and sales fell slightly further in April before quickly recovering to nearly pre-pandemic levels in May. Sales increased in December of 2020 and the first two quarters of 2021, before another decline beginning in June 2021. The market eventually found stability around pre-pandemic levels again. Figure #3 shows the yearly sales volumes from 2019-2022.

As visualized in Figure #3, yearly sales dramatically fell in 2020, then made a small recovery in 2021 before once again falling in 2022. Comparing the changes in price and in quantity can help determine some of the causes of the changes. Overall, prices rose and the quantity of vehicles fell. This combination implies a decrease in supply in the automobile market, which can be seen in Figure #4. There were also indubitably changes in the demand for automobiles in the United States, but the changes in price and quantity suggest that the change in supply was larger.

Between pre-pandemic 2020 and the end of 2022, prices had increased by almost 30%, while sales had only decreased by just under 20%. The relative sizes of the changes in price and quantity are also visible on the graph, and are explained by the high price elasticities of both supply and demand of vehicles in America. A large change in the price of automobiles leads to a small change in quantity supplied since the factories and factors of production that go into the manufacturing of vehicles are complex and are difficult to change quickly in reaction to a change in price. A large change in price also leads to a small change in quantity demanded for automobiles for several reasons. Since the entire automobile industry is represented in the data collected, there are very few substitutes, resulting in a low elasticity of demand since consumers have limited options. Cars are a necessity for many people to commute to work and other places, so they will still be incentivized to make the purchase even at higher prices. Finally, the time period considered spans three years, and people cannot simply put off the purchase of a car forever since they are a necessary part of life for many people. This means that at higher prices, people will eventually still buy a car.

There were many factors that combined to result in the changes in price and quantity by impacting both supply and demand for cars. I will now determine the theoretical effects that the three previously mentioned factors would have on the market with all else being equal, beginning with the federal interest rate.
<END>
<START>
Commentary on " Interest Rates in the United States "

One way that central banks can influence the economy is the manipulation of interest rates. They can do this by adjusting the federal funds rate or by using other monetary policies to affect the money supply and therefore affect interest rates in the country. The Effective Federal Funds Rate (EFFR) “is calculated as a volume-weighted median of overnight federal funds transactions” (New York Fed, n.d.). Interest rates are essentially the price of borrowing money, since both commercial and central banks charge interest when a loan is taken out. Loans are generally relied on for larger purchases, so interest rates have greater impacts on markets with higher prices such as real estate, post-secondary education, and automobiles. The EFFR and target range for the EFFR set by the Fed are shown below in Figure #5.

When the economy plummeted in March of 2020, the Federal Reserve reacted by dropping the target range for the EFFR down to 0-0.25 on March 16th. The Fed announced that they would keep rates low until the economy recovered from the recession. In reality, rates were not raised for almost exactly two years, with the target EFFR range finally being increased to 0.25-0.50 on March 17th of 2022. They then increased the rate incrementally throughout the rest of 2022, ending the year at 4.33, with a target range of 4.25-4.50.
With the goal of supporting an economy mutilated by the pandemic, the low interest rates were one of the primary causes for the period of high inflation rates beginning in April of 2021 shown in Figure #1 discussed previously. Another major cause was high levels of government spending. Both of these measures are examples of expansionary policies that led to an increase in aggregate demand throughout the entire United States economy, visualized below in Figure #6.

Figure #6 represents the effects that the interest rates would have on the economy during the recession with no other factors considered. The low interest rates caused an increase in aggregate demand from extremely low levels at AD1 after the pandemic up to AD2. This increased real Gross Domestic Product, or output, towards full employment levels from Y1 to Y2, and bumped up price levels in all markets from PL1 to PL2. Although there is still a recessionary gap present with aggregate demand at AD2, the increase in aggregate demand eventually caused prices to increase and inflation to rise above normal levels just over a year later.

Lowered interest rates also affect imports and exports through international trade. Lowered interest rates in the United States will cause a depreciation in the USD in terms of foreign currencies. Foreign investors are less willing to invest in American banks with lower rates, causing demand for USD to fall and thus decreasing its value. With the new exchange rate, US exports will be cheaper and imports will be more expensive, resulting in net exports to increase and demand for domestically produced products to grow.

Changes in the automobile market specifically will look similar to the rest of the economy, with demand increasing along with price and quantity. The effect will be greater for cars than for the average good since the market is more sensitive to interest rates than almost all other markets. Additionally, the changes in price and quantity would be different sizes due to the low price elasticities of supply and demand for automobiles.

When comparing the theoretical effects of lowered interest rates to the actual effects seen in the car market from 2020-2022, it is clear that although the rates had some impact, there must have been at least one other factor contributing to the changes. The predicted large increase in prices was seen in the market, however, yearly sales decreased throughout the time period instead of increasing, as would be the case if interest rates were the sole factor. Looking closer at the monthly sales volumes, however, it can be seen that quantity decreased by about 11% only a couple months after interest rates started increasing in March of 2022, not returning to the same level until December of 2022. Additionally, although sales plummeted in March and April of 2020, they recovered surprisingly quickly with high sales volumes at the end of 2020 and beginning of 2021, likely in part due to the quick reduction of interest rates in an attempt to keep the economy afloat. The theoretical increase in quantity is small due to elasticities, so it could easily be canceled out by another factor, meaning that interest rates are not ruled out as a cause for the changes seen in the car market. Interest rates worked alongside at least one other factor, most likely something that would decrease the quantity of vehicles purchased through a decrease in supply. One such example that could help give a more complete picture of the inputs to the car market was the government-enforced pandemic shutdowns.
<END>
<START>
Commentary on " Pandemic Shutdowns "

In March of 2020, the Covid-19 pandemic forced government officials to declare a historic closing of all nonessential businesses, essentially shutting down the entire economy. Unemployment soared and many businesses shut their doors for good. Businesses slowly reopened as restrictions were lifted and trillions of dollars were pumped into the economy by the government through relief and stimulus programs. By the end of 2021, unemployment had nearly reached pre pandemic levels and the economy recovered remarkably quickly before it overshot equilibrium as high inflation became an issue (Lonas, 2022).

During the shutdowns, both aggregate supply and demand fell sharply since all nonessential businesses were closed. People did not leave their homes and were not buying as much goods and services, and production and manufacturing came to a halt in almost all industries. This was especially true of the automobile industry, as production was shut down to try to reduce the spread of the virus since vehicles were not considered an “essential” business. Production and sales for light vehicles are shown below in Figure #7.

Production dropped sharply, but quickly recovered to pre-pandemic levels by about August of 2020. Demand for vehicles was also heavily affected by the quarantining and business closures. Most people rarely left their house for at least the first few months of the pandemic, and the utility of a personal vehicle became miniscule. All nonessential workers were either laid off or working from home, so cars were no longer a necessity to get to work. Even workers considered essential such as those employed in healthcare or the food industry were less likely to purchase a car due to decreased financial security for all households and higher uncertainty about the future of the country and its economy. The only need most people had for a car was to buy groceries, but online delivery services became popular as a substitute since people were hesitant to go out in public due to the virus, further reducing the demand for personal vehicles.

Once the restrictions were lifted and businesses started reopening, the economy continued to feel the indirect effects of the shutdowns. When people started regaining their jobs and receiving check benefits from the government there was an influx in demand throughout the economy. Some firms were not able to handle the new demand causing shortages in many markets, including the vehicle market. There was even more pressure put on domestic producers due to the increase in net exports caused by the change in interest rates discussed previously. After both supply and demand plummeted during the pandemic, demand recovered much faster due to government support resulting in a net decrease in supply, shown below in Figure #8.

Figure #8 shows the car market at various stages of the pandemic-induced recession, starting at point A before the pandemic began along supply curve S1 and a pre-pandemic demand curve not shown. Once the pandemic began and the government shut down the economy, supply fell to S2 and demand fell to D1, and the market arrived at point B with a large decrease in quantity from Q1 to Q2 but a similar price at P2. P2 is shown as smaller than P1 in this figure, however it could also be equal to or greater than P1 depending on whether or not the decrease in supply was greater than or less than the decrease in demand. Once businesses began reopening and government aid arrived, demand quickly recovered to D2. Since firms were unable to respond quickly to the sudden surge of demand, quantity demanded increased to point C but quantity supplied remained at point B, resulting in a shortage represented by the difference between Q3 and Q2. Once the economy fully recovers from the effects of the shutdowns and production levels increase back to their full capacity, quantity supplied will increase to meet quantity demanded Q4 and the economy will settle in equilibrium at point D and a price of P3.

An overall shift from point A to point D with a decrease in quantity and an increase in price is representative of the actual effects seen in the car market from 2020-2022. The relative sizes of the changes to price and quantity may not be accurate since the size of the changes in supply and demand were not precise. Regardless, it can be inferred that the pandemic shutdowns were a major factor in the fluctuations witnessed in the United States car market in the months and years following March of 2020, and that they helped cause some of the other factors contributing to the market’s conditions. The shutdowns and interest rate changes alone seem to be enough to create the previously analyzed effects in the car market, however, another factor that is more specific to the automobile industry was the shortage of computer chips.
<END>
<START>
Commentary on " Computer Chip Shortages "
In recent years, technology has spread into new areas of our lives to improve performance, safety, and convenience. The automotive industry is a prime example of this evolution of technology, as new cars are being loaded with electronic systems. This has resulted in a large growth of the semiconductor and computer chip market, but also an interdependence between the two markets that has proven fragile after the events of 2020-2021. When demand snapped back after falling during the pandemic, there was suddenly high amounts of pressure put on chip manufacturers to ramp up production, especially to provide for other demanding industries such as cars. The shortages have forced many car factories to slow or even stop production, since the chips are now a necessary factor of production for car manufacturing.
The shortage in computer chips were a major factor in the shortage in automobiles shown in Figure #8, and the two markets behaved similarly with the sudden flood of demand. The shortage in the computer chip market is pictured below in Figure #9.

Figure #9: Shortage in United States Computer Chip Market in 2020-2022
After pandemic shutdowns caused both supply and demand of computer chips to shift to low levels at S and D1, the market was at a low quantity of Q1 and a price of P1. Once the economy reopened and there was a sudden surge in demand for chips, demand increased to D2. Much of this new demand was from the car industry, since chips are a factor of production of vehicles. Computer chips have a high price elasticity of supply since the creation of chips is a long, complex process that cannot be sped up easily, and it uses expensive machinery that takes a long time to become functional, causing a lengthy expansion period (Miles et al., 2022). When producers were unable to keep up with the new demand at point B with quantity demanded of Q2, quantity supplied remained at Q1 and a shortage emerged the size of the difference between Q2 and Q1. The predicted timeline for full recovery continued to be pushed back by experts, but the market will eventually settle at point C with a new quantity of Q3 and a price of P2. Demand also began cooling off by the end of 2022, which will continue in the future in helping correct the shortage while suppliers try not to overshoot Q3 in their ramp-up efforts.
In the meantime, the shortage caused major issues in many dependent markets, including the automobile industry. Chips are a factor of production for cars, so the increase in price and overall low quantity supplied leads to a decrease in supply for cars. In production, an estimate of 10.5 million cars were lost due to a lack of chips in 2021, and 4.5 were lost 2022, with a projected 3 million lost in 2023 (Scott, 2023). It can be seen in Figure #7 that although production initially jumped back to pre-pandemic levels, it quickly began declining throughout the rest of 2020 and 2021, hitting a low in September of 2021.
The decrease in production in 2021 and 2022 after the initial drop off in March 2020 can be attributed to the shortage of computer chips caused by the sudden burst of demand after restrictions were lifted. As shown in Figure #2, in September of 2021 sales hit their lowest point since April of 2020, which correlates with a production low as well. Like the other factors considered, the shortage also contributed to the increase in the prices of cars. It also restricted the supply of cars, adding to the shortage depicted in Figure #8. The decrease in supply also lines up with the decrease in quantity viewed in the market and the predicted overall decrease in supply. In general, the computer chip shortage likely was a major factor in many of the supply side effects witnessed after the pandemic shutdowns ended and restrictions were lifted.
<END>
<START>
Commentary on “EU should impose higher tariffs on Chinese automakers, Carlos Tavares says”

The global economy is the international exchange of goods and services integrated into a single market. The article discusses how the current tariffs and subsidies in China have negative effects on the electric vehicle (EV) market in the EU. The article demonstrates the key concept of interdependence which describes how individuals and societies are not independent, but interact with and rely on each other. Countries can work together to achieve shared economic goals, or they can take advantage of each other. In this article, the market for electric vehicles is dependent on protectionism enacted by other global economies. 

Since the price of imported goods are lower than the equilibrium price for domestic supply and domestic demand, domestic suppliers are only willing and able to produce goods at Q2. Consumers demand goods at Q1, meaning that China will import goods to make up the difference at price Pw. This shows how countries depend on the exports of other economies, meaning they are interdependent.

The article states that Chinese pay tariffs of 10 percent to import cars into the EU, while the EU between 15 percent and 25 percent to import into China. After placing a tariff on imported goods, the world supply curve would shift upwards to Pw+tas foreign goods are more expensive. The increased price means that domestic suppliers are willing and able to produce a larger quantity, Q4. Additionally, at this higher price, consumers will no longer be willing and able to buy goods at the previous quantity, Q1. The difference between the quantity of domestic goods and the quantity demanded is now less, meaning that the quantity of imported goods needed to make up for the excess demand is also less. The higher the tariff, the less goods are imported. Therefore, a higher tariff on European goods in China means that the Chinese market for EVs is protected because the EU exports less EVs and consumers in China will purchase more vehicles made domestically. 

Revenue for Chinese producers will increase from area C + D to area A + B + C + D + E. The revenue for foreign producers decreases from area E + F + G to area G.

The article suggests that the EU should match China's “muscular support for EVs” by subsidizing the EV industry. At the world supplied price of a good, Pw, the EU is only willing and able to produce quantity Q2. At price Pw, the domestic demand for electric vehicles is Q1, the quantity at which the domestic demand curve meets world supply. The excess demand between the quantity supplied and the quantity demanded domestically is the quantity of imports. Before a subsidy, this quantity would be Q1 – Q2. When the government subsidizes the production of electric vehicles, the cost of production will decrease and the supply curve shifts right. Domestic producers are now able to produce the quantity, Q3, of goods at Pw. The EU will now import less because more domestic demand is already being met by domestic supply. 

If the EU subsidized EV production, domestic producers would increase their revenue from area C to area A + B + C + D and foreign producers would decrease their revenue from D + E to E.

The article suggests that the EU should raise their tariffs and increase monetary support for the EV industry as China has been doing. Increasing a tariff has negative effects for Germany, “whose automakers are much more embedded in China,” again showing the interdependence of the world’s economies. Theory also does not account for factors aside from the laws of supply and demand. The article states that, “A tariff raise could be seen as a provocative move in China, where customers have shown to react quickly to perceived attacks by boycotting foreign brands,” which suggests that though a tariff would protect domestic producers by decreasing imports from China, it may also decrease exports to China. 

“T&E also said that the EU needs to stimulate local EV production,’” suggesting that the EU should subsidize the industry to promote domestic production. However, there are also drawbacks to this solution. Protecting domestic production harms foreign producers, which may cause increased tensions between China and the EU. The actions that one country takes has effects on the welfare and economy of another because they are interdependent. Additionally, domestic firms may lack incentive to make their business more efficient. By prioritizing one industry, the nation may also have a misallocation of resources, which, in turn, makes society worse off. On the other hand, the EU will be protected from dumping, or selling below the cost of production to establish a foothold in a foreign market, which the article suggests China is doing. Lastly, domestic jobs will be protected since the lack of protectionism policy means that “The continent’s climate and jobs are at stake.”
<END>
<START>
Commentary on "Near 50-year high German inflation strengthens case for larger ECB rate rise"

The above article details Germany’s record inflation rates resulting from the Russo-Ukrainian crisis. The crisis has brought about unprecedented levels of inflation in almost every national economy. Germany is no different.

Macroeconomics is a branch of economics that studies the behavior and performance of an economy as a whole in the aggregate. When a country’s inflation is exceedingly high, economic well-being is lowered as consumers cannot afford the higher cost of goods. This creates a challenge in reaching the macroeconomic objectives: stable economic growth, low unemployment, and a low and stable inflation rate. The level of inflation mentioned in the article is 8.9%, “more than four times the ECB’s 2% target”, a factor that is in direct opposition with the third macroeconomic objective. In order to achieve an allocatively efficient market, measures must be taken to guide inflation down to a low and stable rate.

The following diagram illustrates the inflation present in the German macroeconomy:

Cost-Push Inflation in German Macroeconomy

According to the article, the Russo-Ukrainian conflict’s effect on energy prices “have been the primary driver behind higher inflation”. As costs of factors of production have increased, short-run aggregate supply (SRAS) shifts from SRAS1 to SRAS2. This results in real GDP shifting down from Y1 to Y2 as there are less goods and services being sold in the German macroeconomy. In order to mitigate the effects of these increased costs of factors of production, price levels increase. Higher price levels without changes in income leads to lower spending ability in the long term, resulting in reduced economic well-being.

All of these circumstances point to a situation of cost-push inflation. This makes it challenging to meet the macroeconomic objective of low and stable inflation, but since price levels have also increased for businesses, unemployment could also potentially increase. This would hinder Germany’s ability to meet another macroeconomic objective: low unemployment. Instead of the natural rate of unemployment, which is actually necessary for the economy, cost-push inflation would create disequilibrium unemployment and potentially result in a variety of economic, personal, and social costs. This further reduces economic well-being by jeopardizing present and future financial security.

One way to combat cost-push inflation would be to implement contractionary monetary policy. This is demonstrated in the graph below:

Effects of Contractionary Monetary Policy on German Macroeconomy

If the Bundesbank were to pass policy associated with contractionary monetary policy, the resulting increased interest rates would lower inflation back down to a manageable level. 
Higher interest would reduce spending by increasing the price levels of loans for both consumers and businesses. Reduced consumer spending and business investment would consequently reduce AD to match the reduced SRAS (from cost-push inflation). This would bring the German macroeconomy back to a state of allocative efficiency and economic well-being.

Rather than directly changing interest rates, the Bundesbank actually changes the money supply, or the amount of money circulating throughout the economy. This can be done by increasing the reserve ratio and discount rate, as well as selling government bonds. It is important to note that the Bundesbank cannot manipulate interest directly; these actions create market forces that typically lead to higher or lower interest rates. 

Contractionary monetary policy is an effective solution to high inflation. Monetary policy leads to perceived central bank transparency–improved credibility and ethos would allow the Bundesbank greater freedom to make future economic decisions. The Bundesbank having full control over the money supply also means monetary policy can be implemented without political constraints. In other words, no interference from the German government or European Union. Lastly, direct changes to the money supply and interest rates mean inflation can be handled incrementally in a controlled manner. Rather than hoping for the policy to be effective, components of monetary policy (the reserve ratio, discount rate, and selling of government bonds) can be calculated to specifically target Germany’s desired rate of inflation. These combined factors make the solution of contractionary monetary policy effective in matching the new SRAS. 

Regardless, monetary policy does have its drawbacks. Since it primarily affects loan prices, it would only impact the investment component of aggregate demand. Consumption, government spending, and the difference between exports and imports would not be impacted. To address this failure, the Bundestag could implement contractionary fiscal policy as fiscal policy affects all factors of aggregate demand with the exception of investment. The ability of monetary policy to function without government input means it can more easily achieve macroeconomic objectives, but also means it could contradict government objectives. While fiscal policy is a way Germany could reach these government objectives, such miscommunication and the use of contradictory policies could render both parties’ policies ineffective.

Lower inflation would increase financial security on behalf of all German consumers and businesses, restoring allocative efficiency and establishing a state of economic well-being.
<END>
<START>
Commentary on “Huge profits at BP and Shell revive calls for windfall tax to tackle fuel poverty”

Microeconomics is the study of how individuals and societies use scarce resources to fulfill unlimited needs and wants. This article examines the economic conditions of oil companies and how a temporary tax by the government can help households pay soaring energy bills. More specifically, the temporary tax discussed is a windfall tax that is utilized by governments when economic conditions result in above-average profits for certain industries. In this case, UK’s biggest oil companies made $32 billion in profits last year, which is described as a “momentous” year. The windfall tax acts as an ad valorem tax because it is increasing the rate of corporate taxes at major oil companies in the UK. The key concept in this economic article is intervention and more specifically, government intervention. Government intervention is for the following reasons: generate revenue, support firms, promote equity, influence levels of production and consumption, support low-income households, and correct market failure. The government is imposing a higher tax to support low-income households by reducing the costs of energy bills. The revenue generated can offset the 5% sales tax on energy for one year and also increases energy subsidies from $190 to $545 for the poorest families. Below are graphs that represent this tax increase, impacting the market economy. 

Before government intervention, the demand and supply curve reached the market equilibrium (E), where quantity demanded equals quantity supplied. After the ad valorem tax, there will be a smaller amount of energy production by BP and Shell companies, as seen in the supply curve shift from S1 to S2. Since the price of energy increases after the ad valorem tax is applied, the quantity demanded of it will decrease, establishing new prices at Pc and Pp and a new quantity at Qtax. Because energy is an inelastic good as represented by the inelastic demand curve of D, the quantity demanded will shift proportionately less, creating less welfare loss for BP and Shell companies. This is seen in the shaded area of both graphs between Qtax to Qe and Qso to Q1. The article also explains that a 10% increase in tax on energy companies in the UK would be the most impactful, as seen in the S2 curve calculation. This tax increase corrects the production of oil/natural gas and its resulting pollution/high energy bills, a negative producer externality seen in the 2nd graph. The MPC curve will reach closer to the MSC, allowing to reach social optimization. With this tax increase, the government earns additional revenue, as represented in the shaded section on the 1st graph between Pc and Pp. According to Labour Party spokesperson Rachel Reeves, “The additional revenue would be spent on eliminating the 5% sales tax on energy for a year. Labour would also increase energy subsidies for the poorest households to £400 ($545) per year from £140 ($190).” The government revenue gained from this tax is paid back to low-income households while other types of consumers still pay a higher price for the energy, as seen in the Pc price. 

The government’s tax on BP and Shell must be evaluated against its purpose. The purpose was to help households pay high energy bills and the government was both successful and unsuccessful. It is unsuccessful because most consumers will have to pay a higher price for their energy than before as the target from the government revenue does not extend to all. In addition, it can “leave consumers even more exposed to global shortages” according to OGUK. On the other hand, low-income consumers benefit from this because the additional government revenue collected will offset their sales tax and increase the subsidy, supporting low income households. The tax has a negative result on producers as that “would make energy companies less likely to invest in the country” and create welfare loss. BP and Shell will not be willing and able to produce much energy in the UK as they will be unable to maximize profits. However, it helps society at a time where inflation is high because it maintains the cost of living in UK and the government is able to do its part in reaching the UN goal of universal access to affordable, reliable, and modern energy services. An alternative would be to place a price ceiling on energy’s cost. This would promote equity as low-income households will be able to afford energy and other consumers will not have to pay more. There would not be a large shortage of energy either as the demand is price inelastic. However, from a producer standpoint, a price ceiling will create deadweight loss in the economy and reduce energy. While the windfall tax proved beneficial in certain areas, alternative methods should be explored in order to combat the high energy bills for households.
<END>
<START>
Commentary on “Why are California’s Democratic leaders reluctant to halt the state’s gas tax hike?”

Microeconomics is the study of how individuals and societies use scarce resources to fulfill unlimited wants and needs. Intervention is when the government interferes with the natural movement of the market in order to achieve a specific goal, for example managing the use of scarce resources. In California, legislators placed a tax on gas which decreases the supply and changes the natural movement of the market, and are now considering another increase in tax. The goal of this intervention is to bring in revenue for public goods, such as transportation, road maintenance, and parks. 

Figure 1 shows the effects of the indirect tax, per gallon, on gas that is currently in place in California. The firm will no longer be willing and able to supply at the previous quantities, shifting the supply curve from S1 and S2. The difference represents the 51.1 cents per gallon that California taxes at where the government revenue is area A + B. This tax causes the quantity to decrease from QE to Q2 and the price to increase from PE to P2, $4.72 per gallon. 
The supply curves are price inelastic since the resources needed to produce gas require more specialized resources and money, meaning that the costs of production are inflexible and high. The demand curve is also price inelastic because many Californians rely on personal vehicles to commute, meaning that gas is a necessity good. 

As seen in Figure 2, if the “gasoline tax increase scheduled to take effect in July” is not halted, the increase would cause the supply curve to shift from S2 to S3. The quantity would decrease from Q2 to Q3 and the price would increase from P2 to P3, equal to P2 plus the additional tax. The government revenue is equal to (P3 - PE) * Q3, but the additional revenue, area A + B, is around $500 million. 

Both amounts of tax will create welfare loss, area C + D in Figure 1, because government intervention changes the natural pattern of the market. With increased taxes, the welfare loss is greater, area C + D + E + F + G + H in Figure 2. This occurs because the tax causes the quantity produced to be lower than the socially optimal point, shown when Gallagher states that “Gas prices hit a new record today and it’s getting harder and harder for Californians to drive to work and take their kids to school.” This shows the magnitude of the tax, since demand is price inelastic, but quantity demanded still changes.

Due to the welfare loss that taxation creates and the goal of the proposed tax increase, the government should halt the tax increase. Assembly Speaker Anthony Rendon says, “Gas prices hit a new record today and it’s getting harder and harder for Californians to drive to work and take their kids to school,” Welfare loss increases with tax. Part of this welfare loss is the inability of Californians to carry out daily activities, which hurts the economy because education and productivity decrease. The tax increase also is not in effort to reduce welfare loss due to the overconsumption of gas; instead, it is to earn government revenue. As a result, no welfare loss is being reduced by shifting private benefit or cost towards social benefit or cost, and welfare loss is only being created by the tax. Rendon defends the passage of this tax, saying “That’s something that could potentially jeopardize a tremendous amount of jobs in this state, it could inhibit some economic growth.”He also states that the revenue from the tax is to make sure “our transit operations are running and running smoothly…that our roads are safe.” The government revenue earned from the tax is used in the budget for transportation, which is just as essential for people to commute to work, school, etc. This would then also generate money for the income of construction workers and tradesmen, providing jobs for Californians. Additionally, because of the inelastic demand for gas, the government is able to earn a large amount of revenue, since a high tax only causes a small fall in demand. Gallagher implies that the revenue from the tax does not go entirely to transportation and is being used inefficiently. If the excess revenue were to be used in other areas, for example, to subsidize electric vehicles and public transportation, this would remove welfare loss caused by negative externalities of consumption and benefit Californians. Though the tax would gain less revenue in the long term, it would justify the increased taxes. Overall, the revenue generated is beneficial for redistributing wealth and funding public goods and services needed and desired by Californians. However, because of the welfare loss it creates and the “$40 billion surplus,” the additional tax should be halted as it is not beneficial, nor necessary, for Californians. 
<END>
<START>
Commentary on "Ed Miliband energy plan boost: Other EU countries already have charges capped"

This article is about Ed Miliband’s proposal to freeze prices for energy. Six market giants are complaining that this will make the profits fall and could lead to blackouts.

According to the article the UK’s energy market is dominated by six firms. A market with such competition level is an oligopoly. As it consists of six large firms, they are interdependent: firms have to consider actions and reactions of their competitors. Products in an oligopoly are normally (however, not in electricity market) differentiated. Finally, there are rather high barriers to entry.

The article states that prices in the UK for electricity have been rising the quickest in Europe. Reasons are not mentioned but there could be a few possibilities. Firstly, there is a chance that every firm’s production costs have been increasing. Consider the diagram (for simplicity, a monopoly diagram is used):

Assume British Gas is producing quantity Q1 where MC1=MR and none of the Big Six are colluding formally or informally. An increase in firm’s production costs means an increase in its marginal costs (MC1-MC2) which are additional costs of producing one more unit of output. After the increase British Gas starts producing Q2 at its profit maximising point where MC2=MR and price increases P1-P2. It is likely that this will happen to other firms in the market as well, because there is no obvious reason for having only one firm’s costs increasing.

Economic concept of “sticky prices” states that firms in such situations should not change the price. It suggests that if a firm increases the price, competitors will not follow and that firm will lose revenue as consumers will migrate to another supplier. However, in the electricity market consumers sign fixed-term contracts with suppliers. Sometimes in order to terminate a contract a fine must be paid. These possible complications2 allow suppliers to increase the price virtually without losing clients. People facing difficulties changing the producer are more likely to pay the extra cost. After a firm notices that competitors have increased prices and consumers did not migrate, it starts to charge more as well. So the prices in electricity market might be increasing due to increasing production costs.

If firms’ costs really are increasing, price ceiling which is the maximum price the producer can charge, might actually hit profits and possibly lead to blackouts. In this case, firms are increasing charges in order to keep abnormal profit maximum. If after the maximum price is introduced the production costs keep increasing, eventually abnormal profits might disappear at all. This could be the reason why firms state that price freeze “<…> will hit investment”. If costs increase above the price ceiling, firms might start making a loss: “<…> could lead to blackouts”. However, this is unlikely to happen as “UK customers pay the 4th highest for electricity <…> although the overall cost to the consumer is 12th”. So in other countries consumers pay less even though the costs of production are higher. Then Miliband’s plan would probably work as desired: it would lower firms’ abnormal profits and offer lower prices for a necessity.

Another reason for rising prices could be the decision of the Big Six to informally collude. If so, the idea to cap prices would not only stop that but also benefit the consumer. Consider the diagram:

The market starts in equilibrium at Q1 where MC=MR1 and P1. The government sets the price P2. P2aD becomes the new demand curve for electricity. Maximum price (P2) becomes firms’ marginal revenue (MR2) which is the additional revenue from the sale of an additional unit. Normally, price ceiling would cause supply to contract. However, in this situation as firms always produce at profit maximising point MC=MR2 supply and demand extend Q1->Q2. Also, because at quantity Q2, P2=MC, electricity market becomes allocatively efficient. It means that resources are allocated in the way that quantity of good produced is the quantity preferred by the customers.

If the speculation that the Big Six are colluding to fix prices is correct, Miliband’s price ceiling might be a good solution. Firstly, it should stop oligopolies from colluding as they would not have the possibility to increase charges. Secondly, consumers would be protected from oligopolies exploiting their power and putting up the prices. Thirdly, the market would be allocatively efficient. That means that there would be no deadweight welfare loss – loss of social surplus. However, price freeze might lower firms’ abnormal profits. That could negatively affect investments in research and development possibly deterring improvements in efficiency.
<END>
<START>
Commentary on "Bank of Japan to inject 80 trillion yen into its economy"

The article is about the Bank of Japan injecting 80 trillion yen into the economy in its attempt to increase inflation.

This injection means the Bank of Japan will purchase government issued bonds thus, increasing the money supply in the economy. Government bonds are held by people, banks, pension funds and possibly other institutions. When those bonds will be exchanged for Japanese currency, money supply in the economy will increase. Most of that money will eventually end up in Japan’s banks. As banks will have more money to lend, they will decrease interest rates. To explain the effect of this policy the diagram below will be used:

Japan’s economy is now in short run equilibrium at Y1P1 where AD1=SRAS because the article stated: “… Japanese economy is now <…> in its process of getting out of deflation.” When interest rates fall, it becomes cheaper to borrow money and therefore, consumption and investment should increase. Both of them are the elements of aggregate demand – the total goods and services demanded in an economy at different price levels over a certain period of time. Meaning, when they increase, aggregate demand should increase as well, so AD should shift AD1->AD2. Firms respond to growing demand by producing more. To produce more firms demand more labour so unemployment falls and that in turn causes wages to rise. Rise in wages means higher productions costs, thus prices in the economy start rising P1->P2. Eventually, Japan’s economy should end up in long run equilibrium at Y2P2 where LRAS=AD2 with increased GDP Y1->Y2, fallen unemployment and risen price level P1->P2. Hence, this policy should help Japan escape the deflationary gap. Also, increase GDP and decrease unemployment of which both usually are considered positive impacts.

In evaluation, falling interest rates means “hot money”, which is financial capital used by speculators and banks to maximize interest, outflow from the country. That happens because it becomes less beneficial to keep one’s money in a Japanese bank. Yen depreciates: “Japan’s central bank <…> sent yen to a near-seven-year low…” and import prices rise.Japan is importing some products with low price elasticity of demand which is the measure of the responsiveness of the quantity of a good demanded to a change in its price, for example, oil. The article states “Lower oil prices are expected to bring inflation down…” but depreciating currency might weigh out the effect of falling oil prices. If Japan is importing other goods which are essential for their production, meaning they have low PED, it would increase production costs and cause imported inflation. That would also help the government in tackling deflation.

Also, Japan’s exports should become more competitive as a result of falling value of yen, suggesting that they should rise and increase aggregate demand. If the sum of Japan’s imports’ and exports’ PEDs are one or more, suggesting that the Marshall-Lerner condition is met, that would mean that depreciating yen would improve country’s balance of trade. Balance of trade is the net value of exports and imports of an economy over a period of time. Improved BOT would mean rising aggregate demand which would lead to similar account of events that was explained before.

Money injections causing interest rates to fall also leads to people going from bond to share market because it might offer bigger interest. The article informs: “Asian stock markets all closed higher…” The effect of this phenomena depends on who owns shares in Japan. If shareholders are mainly high income people who have large proportions of companies then they become even wealthier and might not necessarily consume more domestically. Thus, the effect on inflation from this fact would be insignificant. However, if shares are held by a number of low to middle income people, then the domestic consumption might grow causing aggregate demand to increase. That could happen because of wealth effect making people feel richer and hence, more likely to spend.

To evaluate, this policy fails if there is no borrowing. Japan has an ageing population which tends to consume less than a young population and might even be living off their savings, hence, borrowing little to none. This policy also hurts savers as they lose interest on their savings, so they have to save even more. Also, the article mentioned negative real wage growth which could be the reason not to borrow as people are not confident about their future income. So, even if interest rates fall people might not borrow and consume more, hence, the policy would not work.
<END>
<START>
Commentary on "LED Streetlights Bring Cost Savings, and Headaches, To Colorado Cities"

Many problems are associated with the economic evaluation and provision of public goods. How should communities proceed with the installation of LED streetlights in order to ensure that there is allocative efficiency, with the social surplus being maximized where marginal social cost=marginal social benefit (MSC=MSB)?

Streetlights are public goods because they are non-rivalrous and non-excludable. This causes complications when attempting to analyze their advantages (Figure 1).

The MSC1 curve represents the supply curve of sodium streetlights. The marginal private benefit (MPB), or demand curve for streetlights, does not intersect with the MSC curve because streetlights are public goods. This signifies that the free rider problem is occurring; no-one (or, in reality, very few people) will buy the good because they are all waiting for someone else to buy it. However, the city government ought to pay for these goods, as the MSB of streetlights is high. Before the implementation of LEDs, the optimum or efficient output was Q1 where the MSB curve intersects the MSC1 curve.

Although the article mentions that LEDs “cost the same”, the MSC2 curve for LED streetlights is below the MSC1 curve. This is because private costs are lower, and “energy savings can be as much as 50 percent”, signifying that the costs of using the lights, for many years after implementation, will decrease significantly.

Therefore, the MSC curve will drop. Simultaneously, the efficient quantity of LED streetlights the city ought to acquire will increase from Q1 to Q2. From the diagram, it can be seen that the city can reduce the costs spent on streetlights and at the same time obtain more. The extra lights can be stored until some need to be replaced, implying that costs in the budget for future purchases of the replacement of lights can also be saved.
 
However, the disadvantages of LED are associated health problems, namely an external cost of consumption (Figure 2).

Because streetlights are public goods, the D (MPB) curve has been shown to be almost irrelevant to the model. Instead, the externality (“health implications” of “increased diabetes and depression”) is shown by the downwards shift of the MSB1 curve to MSB2. The marginal external cost notated in the diagram supposedly measures the per unit negative impact of individual health problems on society.

The diagram shows that the efficient quantity of LEDs is not QP (initially predicted quantity), but QA (actual quantity). It also implies that in order to dissuade cities from implementing harmful LED lights, the efficient “price” of the LED lights at QA will not be cost/benefit2, where MSB2=MSC, but instead at cost/benefit3.

This diagram supports Fort Collins’ argument for changing only part of the city’s streetlights to LED lighting. It illustrates that because of the negative externality, LED lighting, while apparently more “cost-efficient”, has problems. However, the negative externality is probably not so large that LED lighting should be completely eliminated from the city government’s options. It makes sense for Fort Collins to “swap one third of its streetlights to LEDs”. Furthermore, Fort Collins mentioned that they hope to “install 3000 and 4000 Kelvin lights with varying brightness” and “study the results” before making further decisions about whether they will replace the rest of the city’s lights. This exemplifies how communities may use economic models to assess the advantages and disadvantages of public goods, with the aim of improving the well-being of their citizens and reaching allocative efficiency.

However, there are also many limitations to the models above. The models are all static, and do not reflect development of LEDs; an example of rapidly improving, new and clean technology. Research has probably been conducted in order to reduce harmful blue light, and costs of the lights have also been reduced. As the article suggests, the cities have probably taken measures to reduce negative impacts, such as warmer lights, shielding and dimming.

Additionally, more variables should be considered. For instance, the article mentions positive externalities of consumption of LEDs due to the ability to preserve darker night skies. There are also problems associated with LED light patterns being narrow and therefore posing danger of bear attacks. The city must consider different aspects because LEDs are public goods which need to benefit citizens, not only the city budget.

Finally, all the curves and points on the models are qualitative; although they reflect directional shifts, it is impossible to determine the monetary cost of negative and positive externalities. Therefore, applying corrections based on these static models will be unrealistic.

In conclusion, analysis shows that installation of LEDs in some streetlights will save costs while minimizing negative externalities. However, in order to ensure that allocative efficiency is improved, the city government should closely monitor effects on society and citizens’ feedback to make decisions based on reality rather than just on the abstract models.
<END>
<START>
Commentary on "UK house prices rise by 1.6% in August – the largest increase since December 2006"

The recent global economic recession has generated many problems worldwide, such as increased unemployment, lack of consumer confidence and reductions in salaries and wages. In the United Kingdom, housing prices also plummeted, but during August the average cost for a home rose by 1.6%. This is, according to the article, mainly because of low interest rates and shortage of supply.

Low interest rates, the amount borrowers pay to lenders for the usage of the borrowed money, would result in a shift in demand, the ability and willingness to consume a commodity, to the left (Figure 1, D to D1). This is because consumers are encouraged to borrow more, which would lead to increased spending. Consequently, the equilibrium would move from A to B, resulting in an increase in price (P to P1).Diagram 2: UK Housing Market (Supply Shift)

Furthermore, low interest rates would lead to lower mortgage repayments, hence allowing homeowners, usually predicted to sell their homes during a recession, to refrain from doing so. There would be an inwards shift in supply of homes (Figure 2, S to S1), the ability and willingness to provide a commodity, as fewer owners choose to sell their houses, changing the equilibrium from B to C; the price would increase from P1 to P2. Overall, the change in price (P to P2) would amount to 1.6%.

As mentioned in the article, it was forecasted that when there is a rise in interest rates in the future, the housing market may experience some falls in average price. This is because as interest rates increase, there is a higher tendency to save than spend. Thus, the demand curve shifts inwards (Figure 3, D to D1). Also, homeowners may prefer to sell their houses because of higher mortgages, shifting the supply curve outwards (S to S1). On the whole, the equilibrium would have changed from A to B, with prices falling from P to P1.

Diagram 3: UK Housing Market (Speculated Changes after Increased Interest Rates)A future increase in interest rates may affect different stakeholders in various ways; demand and supply changes may not follow what is depicted in Figure 3. Those who have high mortgage repayments may sell their homes and seek to find smaller and cheaper housing. Consequently, demand for small homes may increase, whilst demand for larger homes may decrease.

The article presents the view that in the future, there may be further price falls. This is supported by the anticipation of higher interest rates. Also, because consumer confidence is at a low due to the global economic recession, once supply catches up with demand, ceteris paribus, it may be assumed that prices will not rise any further. Hence, some economists would argue that it is most probable that prices would then fall. In addition, the increase of value added tax in January back to the previous rate of 17.5% would result in using income to compensate for the higher prices. Thus, fewer consumers would be able and willing to buy new homes and demand would drop, leading to a fall in housing prices.

However, other factors that affect demand and supply must be considered before that conclusion is made. For example in the USA, tax credit is available for homebuyers; this would increase disposable income, thus increasing demand. If this is also made available in the UK, the prices of houses may not necessarily fall. Also, because there is speculation that prices may rise, there may continue to be a shortage in supply as homeowners wait to take advantage of higher prices when they sell. Demand would also be enhanced by speculation as consumers are more willing to buy when prices are considered low, than in the future when prices may be higher. Some may also consider buying a house as an investment, because prices are predicted to rise. Thus, if these scenarios occur, price falls may not occur.

The article suggests the reasons why UK house prices rose by 1.6% and then speculates, with satisfactory reasons, why prices may fall in the future. In conclusion, the article is accurate in its justification, but does not consider the full array of alternative reasons which may affect the prices of homes.
<END>

